---
layout: distillPost
title:  Why should we care now?
date:  2021-04-08 00:00:06
description: Contact tracing as a personalization framework
series:
 name: ct
 id: 6

_styles: >
 h3, h2, h1 {
   padding-top: 0!important;
 }

distill: true
mathjax: true
bibliography: ct.bib

summary: >
 <ul>
   <li><em>PCT's early warning signals will become increasingly useful with more dormant characteristics of the virus</em></li>
 </ul>

comments: false
---
As computer scientists, we think about how a proposed solution will fare in a worst-case scenario.
As discussed earlier, <a href="#an-example-heuristic-for-pct">the PCT framework with warning signals strives to caution individuals earlier than without the warning signals</a>.
The usefulness of early warning signals will be more noticeable for a virus that exhibits dormant characteristics, i.e., the host is infectious without definite signs of being infected.

The following changes to the <em>viral profile</em> will increase its dormant characteristics.
<ul>
    <li><strong>Weaker tests &  delayed results</strong>: In the absence of conclusive diagnostic tests, we will be likely to detect an infectious person.
SARS-CoV-2's most conclusive test is through <em>Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction Test (RT-PCR)</em>.
The test's false-negative rate varies depending on the individual's viral load, with a minimum of 33% at the peak viral load<d-cite key="li2020false"></d-cite>.
The test results take at least a day to two to return.
Thus, a <em>worst-case virus</em> will likely have a higher false-negative rate with a longer turnover time.
As an aside, the mega-diagnostic platforms, <a href="https://www.gatesnotes.com/2021-Annual-Letter#ALChapter3">proposed in Bill and Melinda Gates, 2021 Annual letter focused on better preparedness to future pandemic</a>, serve the purpose of faster turnover.
</li>
    <li><strong>Inconclusive symptoms & harsher health-impact</strong>: If an infected individual shares a symptom profile with other common diseases, it is likely to be ignored by an individual.
<a href="https://www.economist.com/britain/2021/01/30/why-britons-go-to-work-with-covid-19">Familiar stories have come up during the Covid-19 pandemic</a>.
SARS-CoV-2 virus exhibits such inconclusive signs of the virus combined with varying degrees of health-impact depending on people.
Thus, a <em>worst-case virus</em> will likely have more of such inconclusive signs for some people and have a harsher health impact on others. </li>
    <li><strong>Longer incubation period </strong>: If an infectious individual is unaware of the infection, they are likely to spread the infection.
<a href="/blog/2021/ct-2/#epidemilogy--virology">Recall that the incubation period is the time since infection before any symptoms appear</a>.
SARS-CoV-2 has a mean incubation period of five days<d-cite key="lauer2020incubation"></d-cite>, so a longer incubation period will likely to lead more infections per individual (i.e. higher reproductive number <em>R</em>).
</li>
    <li><strong>More asymptomatic population & their infectiousness</strong>:
An estimated 20-40%<d-cite key="he2020temporal"></d-cite><d-cite key="luo"></d-cite> of the population does not show any symptoms throughout the time they are infected.
However, their infectiousness (likelihood to infect others) is also roughly 30% of those who exhibit symptoms<d-cite key="luo"></d-cite>.
Thus, a <em>worst-case virus</em> will likely have a larger proportion (less than 100%) of asymptomatic population with higher infectiousness.
</li>
</ul>

Many future pandemic preparedness efforts are likely to be focused on rapid vaccine development and testing platforms.
These efforts will help us fight this <em>worst-case virus</em>.
However, due to the speed and the scale with which digital contact tracing can be deployed, efforts to improve the existing contact tracing frameworks (e.g., PCT<d-cite key="bengio2020predicting"></d-cite>, PanCast<d-cite key="barthe2020pancast"></d-cite>) may prove equally beneficial.
