---
layout: distillPost
title:  Why should we care now?
date:   2021-02-15 00:00:06
description: Contact tracing as a personalization framework
series:
 name: ct
 id: 6

distill: true
mathjax: true
bibliography: ct.bib
---

As of March 2020 after three infection waves and ensuing national lockdowns, We are (almost) past the pandemic (sigh).
It will be naive to think that this doesn't happen again.
In our opinion, the virus has evolved with our defenses creating newer and tougher challenges for us to tackle its adverse effects.
Thus, refining these digital tracing frameworks should help us prepare better for the next time.

With the evolution of virus, it is not hard to imagine the properties of the virus that will be deadlier than Covid-19.

\begin{itemize}
    \item Longer presymptomatic phases: Longer the individual is unaware of the infection, more people that individual is likely to infect.
    This will be reflected in an increase in $R$.
    \item Harsher symptoms: If all the infected individuals exhibit symptoms that require immediate attention, it will lead to a similar or worse conditions that we saw in Covid-19.
    \item higher infectiousness of asymptomatic population: For Covid-19, Individuals who doesn't show any symptoms upon getting infected are only 30\% likely to infect others as those who show symptoms.
    Thus, given the same number of asymptomatic individuals, one can imagine that a higher contagion likelihood of these individuals will only lead to more infections.
\end{itemize}

Hopefully, there never exist a virus that has the above properties.
However, if the above seems plausible, digital tracing frameworks should be improved further.
The work in faster deployment of tests or vaccines is, nevertheless important.
Digital tracing is a technology can be rapidly deployed without any delay, and it can be polished and improved if we were to do pilot studies to prevent contagious diseases like cold or flu.
