---
layout: post
title:  Contact Tracing
date:   2021-02-15
description: Contact Tracing
---
## Why Contact Tracing?

Since March 2020, countries around the world have taken unprecedented measures such as regional lockdowns, strict social distancing measures, etc. to curb the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 virus. While health experts aim to minimize the transmission of the virus while keeping the society functional, the economic experts tend to minimize the economic disruptions. The current pandemic has resulted in several challenges for either parties to fare well in their objectives. Technology has always stepped in to solve such challenging issues. As a result, engineers around the world turned to peer-to-peer bluetooth communication to record (in a privacy preserving manner) encounters between individuals from a certain distance. Several challenges related to the accuracy and privacy of these communications has been the central issue in the development and adoption of these apps.

## Search for a framework

It is natural to ask if the underlying problem that contact tracing is trying to solve can be formulated mathematically. A framework to think about it can enable creative solutions as well as adapt contact tracing framework readily to any virus.

An obvious starting point is to understand how the virus evolves in the host organism. Leaving aside the nitty-gritties of this process, a big picture view reveals two basic stages of the disease - (a) presymptomatic phase - host has the virus but no symptoms (b) symptomatic phase - host has the virus and there are symptoms. It can happen that some infected hosts do not exhibit symptomatic phase. They are termed as asymptomatic hosts. To put this in perspective, according to the studies SARS-CoV-2 has an estimated 20-40% asymptomatic population{% cite asymp_prop -f epi %} and an average presymptomatic phase of 5 days{% cite presymp_length -f epi %}.

Naturally, if a host were to show distinct symptoms of a disease it would be relatively easy to isolate and prevent further transmission. However, COVID-19 has two major difficulties in identification - (a) asymptomatic phase (b) symptoms common to flu. While an asymptomatic individual will not feel any reason to isolate, a symptomatic individual with symptoms common to flu will have doubts whether to isolate or not. There are stories suggesting less compliance by individuals (refer economic times).

Viral Load



## Formulation

It is of help that asymptomatic proportion has a relatively lower infectiousness as compared to symptomatic population. One can easily extrapolate to a virus that has higher asymptomatic infectiousness...

Thus, we turned to virology and learned the stages in which virus grows in a human body, and at what point does it result in more infections. Thus, if technology can be used to predict infectiousness of individuals given their contacts, virus can be tamed. This is what lead to our proposed framework of Proactive Contact Tracing.

While the trajectory of disease progression varies from virus to virus, our team specifically learned such a pattern in SARS-CoV-2. Figure 1 shows a simplified trend.

* Figure 1

## PCT
- What is it?

## Unique properties
- Infinite recursion
- Early warnings

Close with reference to ICLR & Arxiv papers
